// This is a ppgen source file.

// Title      : Phallic Worship
// Author     : anon.
// Project ID : 5f7c95f6bda5b

.dt Phallic Worship, by anon.—A Project Gutenberg eBook

// 01.png
.bn 01.png
.pn 1

.ce
PHALLIC WORSHIP

.pb
// 02.png
.bn 02.png
.pn +1
// 03.png
.bn 03.png
.pn +1

.h1
<xxl>PHALLIC WORSHIP</xxl>

.ce 3
<l>A DESCRIPTION OF THE MYSTERIES</l>
<s>OF THE</s>
<xl>SEX WORSHIP OF THE ANCIENTS</xl>

.ce 2
<l>WITH THE HISTORY OF</l>
<xxl>THE MASCULINE CROSS</xxl>

.ce
AN ACCOUNT OF

.ce 3
PRIMITIVE SYMBOLISM, HEBREW PHALLICISM,
BACCHIC FESTIVALS, SEXUAL RITES, AND
THE MYSTERIES OF THE ANCIENT FAITHS

.ce 3
LONDON
<l>PRIVATELY PRINTED</l>
<s>1880</s>

.pb
// 04.png
.bn 04.png
.pn +1
// 05.png
.bn 05.png
.pn +1

.h2
PREFACE

<i>The present somewhat slight sketch of a most interesting
subject, whilst not claiming entire originality, yet embraces
the cream, so to speak, of various learned works of great cost,
some of which being issued for private circulation only, are almost
unobtainable.</i>

<i>During the past few years several books have been written
upon Phallicism in conjunction with other kindred matters,
but not devoting themselves entirely to one ancient mystery,
the writers have only partially ventilated the subject. The
present work seeks to obviate this failing by confining its
attention entirely to the Sex Worship or Phallicism of the
ancient world.</i>

<i>Many of the topics have received only slight treatment,
being little more than indicated; but the work will enable the
reader to understand and possess the truth concerning the
Phallic Worship of the Ancients.</i>

<i>Those who desire to know more, or to authenticate the
statements and facts given in this book, should consult the large
and important works of Payne Knight, Higgins, Dulaure,
Rolle, Inman, and other writers.</i>

<i>It was intended to give with this volume a list of works
and miscellaneous pieces written on the subject, but the length
of the list prevented its being added.</i>
// 06.png
.bn 06.png
.pn +1
// 07.png
.bn 07.png
.pn +1

.pb

.ce
<xl>PHALLIC WORSHIP</xl>

.h2 nobreak
NATURE AND SEX WORSHIP

Sex Worship has prevailed among all peoples of ancient
times, sometimes contemporaneous and often mixed with
Star, Serpent, and Tree Worship. The powers of nature
were sexualised and endowed with the same feelings,
passions, and performing the same functions as human
beings.

Among the ancients, whether the Sun, the Serpent,
or the Phallic Emblem was worshipped, the idea was the
same—the veneration of the generative principle. Thus
we find a close relationship between the various
mythologies of the ancient nations, and by a comparison
of the creeds, ideas, and symbols, can see that they spring
from the same source, namely, the worship of the forces
and operations of nature, the original of which was doubtless
Sun worship. It is not necessary to prove that in
primitive times the Sun must have been worshipped
under various names, and venerated as the Creator,
Light, Source of Life, and the Giver of Food.

In the earliest times the worship of the generative
power was of the most simple and pure character, rude
in manner, primitive in form, pure in idea, the homage
of man to the supreme power, the Author of life.

Afterwards the worship became more depraved, a
religion of feeling, sensuous bliss, corrupted by a priesthood
// 08.png
.bn 08.png
.pn +1
who were not slow to take advantage of this state
of affairs, and inculcated with it profligate and mysterious
ceremonies, union of gods with women, religious prostitution
and other degrading rites. Thus it was not long
before the emblems lost their pure and simple meaning
and became licentious statues and debased objects.

Hence we have the depraved ceremonies at the worship
of Bacchus, who became, not only the representative
of the creative power, but the God of pleasure and
licentiousness.

The corrupted religion always found eager votaries,
willing to be captives to a pleasant bondage by the
impulse of physical bliss, as was the case in India and
Egypt, and among the Phœnicians, Babylonians, Jews
and other nations.

Sex worship once personified became the supreme and
governing deity, enthroned as the ruling God over all;
dissent therefrom was impious and punished. The priests
of the worship compelled obedience; monarchs complied
to the prevailing faith and became willing devotees to the
shrines of Isis and Venus on the one hand, and of Bacchus
and Priapus on the other, by appealing to the most
animating passion of nature.

.h2
PHALLICISM

This is the worship of the reproductive powers, the
sexual appointments revered as the emblems of the
Creator. The one male, the active creative power;
the other the female or passive power; ideas which were
represented by various emblems in different countries.
// 09.png
.bn 09.png
.pn +1

These emblems were of a pure and sacred character,
and used at a time when the prophets and priests spoke
plain speech, understood by a rude and primitive people;
although doubtless by the common people the emblems
were worshipped themselves, even as at the present day
in Roman Catholic countries the more ignorant, in many
cases, actually worship the images and pictures themselves,
while to the higher and more intelligent minds they are
only symbols of a hidden object of worship. In the
same manner, the concealed meaning or hidden truth
was to the ignorant and rude people of early times entirely
unknown, while the priests and the more learned kept
studiously concealed the meaning of the ceremonies and
symbols. Thus, the primitive idea became mixed with
profligate, debased ceremonies, and lascivious rites,
which in time caused the more pure part of the worship
to be forgotten. But Phallicism is not to be judged
from these sacred orgies, any more than Christianity
from the religious excitement and wild excesses of a few
Christian sects during the Middle Ages.

In a work on the “Worship of the Generative Powers
during the Middle Ages,” the writer traces the superstition
westward, and gives an account of its prevalence throughout
Southern and Western Europe during that period.

The worship was very prevalent in Italy, and was
invariably carried by the Romans into the countries they
conquered, where they introduced their own institutions
and forms of worship. Accordingly, in Britain have
been found numerous relics and remains; and many
of our ancient customs are traced to a Phallic origin.
“When we cross over to Britain,” says the writer, “we
find this worship established no less firmly and extensively
in that island; statuettes of Priapus, Phallic bronzes,
// 10.png
.bn 10.png
.pn +1
pottery covered with obscene pictures, are found wherever
there are any extensive remains of Roman occupation,
as our antiquaries know well. The numerous Phallic
figures in bronze found in England are perfectly identical
in character with those that occur in France and Italy.”

All antiquaries of any experience know the great number
of obscene subjects which are met with among the fine
red pottery which is termed Samian ware, found so
abundantly in all Roman sites in our island. “They
represent erotic scenes, in every sense of the word, with
figures of Priapus and Phallic emblems.”

.h2
PHALLUS

The Phallus, or Lingam, which stood for the image
of the male organ, or emblem of creation, has been
worshipped from time immemorial. Payne Knight
describes it as of the greatest antiquity, and as having
prevailed in Egypt and all over Asia.

The women of the former country carried in their religious
processions, a movable Phallus of disproportionate
magnitude, which Deodorus Siculus informs us signified
the generative attribute. It has also been observed
among the idols of the native Americans and ancient
Scandinavians, while the Greeks represented the Phallus
alone, and changed the personified attribute into a distinct
deity, called Priapus.

Phallus, or privy member (<i>membrum virile</i>), signifies,
“he breaks through, or passes into.” This word survives
in German <i>pfahl</i>, and <i>pole</i> in English. Phallus is supposed
// 11.png
.bn 11.png
.pn +1
to be of Phœnician origin, the Greek word <i>pallo</i>, or
<i>phallo</i>, “to brandish preparatory to throwing a missile,”
is so near in assonance and meaning to Phallus, that one
is quite likely to be parent of the other. In Sanskrit
it can be traced to <i>phal</i>, “to burst,” “to produce,” “to
be fruitful”; then, again, <i>phal</i> is “a ploughshare,” and
is also the name of Siva and Mahadeva, who are Hindu
deities. Phallus, then, was the ancient emblem of
creation: a divinity who was companion to Bacchus.

The Indian designation of this idol was Lingam, and
those who dedicated themselves to its service were to
observe inviolable chastity. “If it were discovered,”
says Crawford, “that they had in any way departed from
them, the punishment is death. They go naked, and
being considered as sanctified persons, the women
approach without scruple, nor is it thought that their
modesty should be offended by it.”

.h2
SYMBOLS OR EMBLEMS

The Phallus and its emblems were representative of the
gods Bacchus, Priapus, Hercules, Siva, Osiris, Baal, and
Asher, who were all Phallic deities. The symbols were
used as signs of the great creative energy or operating
power of God from no sense of mere animal appetite,
but in the highest reverence. Payne Knight, describing
the emblems, says:—

“Forms and ceremonials of a religion are not always
to be understood in their direct and obvious sense, but
// 12.png
.bn 12.png
.pn +1
are to be considered as symbolical representations of some
hidden meaning extremely wise and just, though the
symbols themselves, to those who know not their true
signification, may appear in the highest degree absurd
and extravagant. It has often happened that avarice
and superstition have continued these symbolical representations
for ages after their original meaning has
been lost and forgotten; they must, of course, appear
nonsensical and ridiculous, if not impious and extravagant.
Such is the case with the rite now under consideration,
than which nothing can be more monstrous and indecent,
if considered in its plain and obvious meaning, or as part
of the Christian worship; but which will be found to be
a very natural symbol of a very natural and philosophical
system of religion, if considered according to its original
use and intention.”

The natural emblems were those which from their
character were most suitable representatives; such as
poles, pillars, stones, which were sacred to Hindu,
Egyptian, and Jewish divinities.

Blavalsky gives an account of the Bimlang Stone, to
be found at Narmada and other places, which is sacred
to the Hindu deity Siva; these emblem stones were
anointed, like the stone consecrated by the Patriarch
Jacob.

Blavalsky further says that these stones are “identical
in shape, meaning, and purpose with the ‘pillars’ set up
by the several patriarchs to mark their adoration of the
Lord God. In fact, one of these patriarchal lithoi might
even now be carried in the Sivaitic processions of Calcutta
without its Hebrew derivation being suspected.”
// 13.png
.bn 13.png
.pn +1

.h2
THE POLE

The Pole was an emblem of the Phallus, and with the
serpent upon it, was a representative of its divine wisdom
and symbol of life. The serpent upon the tree is the same
in character, both are representative of the tree of life.
The story of Moses will well illustrate this, when he
erected in the wilderness this effigy, which stood as a
sign of hope and life, as the cross is used by the Catholics
of the present day; the cross then, as now, being simply
an emblem of the Creator, used as a token of resurrection
or regeneration. Æsculapius, as the restorer of health,
has a rod or Phallus with a serpent entwined.

The Rev. M. Morris has shown that the raising of the
May-pole is of Phallic origin, the remains of a custom of
India or Egypt, and is typical of the fructifying powers
of spring.

The May festival was carried on with great licentiousness
by the Romans, and was celebrated by nearly all
peoples as the month consecrated to Love. The May-day
in England was the scene of riotous enjoyment, very
nearly approaching to the Roman Floralia. No wonder
the Puritans looked upon the May-pole as a relic of
Paganism, and in their writings may be gleaned much
of the licentious character of the festival.

Philip Stubbes, a Puritan writer in the reign of Elizabeth,
thus describes a May-day in England: “Every parishe,
towne, and village assemble themselves together, bothe
men, women, and children, olde and younge even indifferently;
and either goyng all together, or devidyng
themselves into companies, they go some to the woods
and groves, some to one place, some to another, where
thei spend all the night in pleasant pastymes; and in the
// 14.png
.bn 14.png
.pn +1
mornyng they returne, bryngyng with them birch bowes
and branches of trees, to deck their assemblies withall....
But their cheerest jewell thei bryng from thence
is their Maie pole, whiche thei bryng home with great
veneration, as thus: thei have twentie or fortie yoke
of oxen, every oxe havyng a sweet nosegaie of flowers
placed on the tippe of his hornes, and these oxen drawe
home this Maie pole (this stinckyng idoll rather), which
is covered all over with flowers and hearbes, bound
rounde aboute with strynges from the top to the bottome,
and sometyme painted with variable colours, with two
or three hundred men, women, and children, followyng
it with great devotion. And thus beyng reared up, with
handekerchiefes and flagges streamyng on the top, thei
strawe the grounde aboute, binde greene boughes aboute
it, sett up sommer haules, bowers, and arbours hard by
it. And then fall thei to banquet and feast, to leape and
daunce aboute it, as the heathen people did at the dedication
of their idols, whereof this is a perfect patterne, or rather
the thyng itself.”

The ceremony was almost identical with the Roman
festival, where the Phallus was introduced with garlands.
Both were attended with the same licentiousness, for
Stubbes gives a further account of the depravity attending
the festivities.

.h2
PILLARS

Another type of emblem was the stone pillar, remains of
which still exist in the British Isles. These pillars or so
called crosses generally consist of a shaft of granite with
// 15.png
.bn 15.png
.pn +1
a carved head. In the West of England crosses are very
common, standing in the market and receiving the name
of “The Cross.”

These stone pillars were first erected in honour of the
Phallic deity, and on the introduction of Christianity
were not destroyed, but consecrated to the new faith,
doubtless to honour the prejudices of the people. These
monolisks abound in the Highlands, they are stones set
up on end, some twenty-four or thirty feet high, others
higher or lower and this sometimes where no such stones
are to be quarried.

We learn that the Bacchus of the Thebans was a pillar.
The Assyrian Nebo was represented by a plain pillar,
consecrated by anointing with oil. Arnobius gives an
account of this practice, as also does Theophrastus, who
speaks of it as a custom for a superstitious man, when
he passed by these anointed stones in the streets to take
out a phial of oil and pour it upon them and having
fallen on his knees to make his adorations, and so depart.

In various parts of the Bible the Pillar is referred to as
of a sacred character, as in Isaiah xix. 19, 20, “In that
day shall there be an altar to Jehovah in the midst of the
land of Egypt, and a <i>pillar</i> at the border thereof to Jehovah,
and it should be for a sign and a witness to the Lord.”

The Orphic Temples were doubtless emblems of the
same principle of the mystic faiths of the ancients, the
same as the Round Towers of Ireland, a history of which
was collected by O’Brien, who describes the Towers as
“Temples constructed by the early Indian colonists
of the country in honour of the <i>Fructifying</i> principle of
nature, emanating as was supposed from the Sun, or the
deity of desire instrumental in that principle of universal
generativeness diffused throughout all nature.”
// 16.png
.bn 16.png
.pn +1

According to the same author these towers were very
ancient, and of Phœnician origin, as similar towers have
been found in Phœnicia. “The Irish themselves,” says
O’Brien, “designated them ‘Bail-toir,’ that is the tower
of Baal. Baal was the name of the Phallic deity, and the
priest who attended them ‘Aoi Bail-toir’ or superintendent
of Baal tower.” This Baal was worshipped
wherever the Phœnicians went, and was represented by
a pillar or stone or similar objects. The stone that
Jacob set up, and anointed as a rallying place for worship,
became afterwards an object of worship to the Phœnicians.

The earliest navigators of the world were the Phœnicians,
they founded colonies and extended their commerce
first to the isles of the Mediterranean, from thence to
Spain, and then to the British Isles. Historians have
accorded to them the settlements of the most remote
localities. They formed settlements in Cyprus, and
Atticum, according to Josephus, was the principal settlement
of the Tyrians upon this island. Strabo’s testimony
is, that the Phœnicians, even before Homer, had possessed
themselves of the best part of Spain.

Where the Phœnicians settled, there they introduced
their religion, and it is in these countries we find the
remains of ancient stone and pillar worship.

.h2
LOGGIN STONES, ETC.

Loggin stones are by Payne Knight considered as
Phallic emblems. “Their remains,” he says, “are still
extant, and appear to have been composed of a crone set
into the ground, and another placed upon the point of
// 17.png
.bn 17.png
.pn +1
it and so nicely balanced that the wind could move it,
though so ponderous that no human force, unaided by
machinery, can displace it; whence they are called
‘logging rocks’ and ‘pendre stones,’ as they were
anciently ‘living stones’ and ‘stones of God,’ titles
which differ very little in meaning from that on the
Tyrian coins. Damascius saw several of them in the
neighbourhood of Heliopolis or Baalbeck, in Syria,
particularly one which was then moved by the wind;
and they are equally found in the Western extremities
of Europe and the Eastern extremities of Asia, in Britain,
and in China.”

Bryant mentions it as very usual among the Egyptians
to place with much labour one vast stone upon another
for a religious memorial.

Such immense masses, being moved by causes seeming
so inadequate, must naturally have conveyed the idea of
spontaneous motion to ignorant observers, and persuaded
them that they were animated by an emanation of the
vital spirit, whence they were consulted as oracles, the
responses of which could always be easily obtained by
interpreting the different oscillatory movements into
nods of approbation or dissent.

Phallic emblems abounded at Heliopolis in Syria, and
many other places, even in modern times. A physician,
writing to Dr. Inman, says: “I was in Egypt last winter
(1865-66), and there certainly are numerous figures of
gods and kings, on the walls of the temple at Thebes,
depicted with the male genital erect. The great temple
at Karnak is, in particular, full of such figures, and the
temple of Danclesa likewise, though that is of much later
date, and built merely in imitation of old Egyptian art.
The same inspiring <i>bas-reliefs</i> are pointed out by Ezek.
// 18.png
.bn 18.png
.pn +1
xxiii. 14. I remember one scene of a king (Rameses II)
returning in triumph with captives, many of whom were
undergoing the process of castration.”

Obelisks were also representative of the same emblem.
Payne Knight mentions several terminating in a cross,
which had exactly the appearance of one of those crosses
erected in churchyards and at cross roads for the adoration
of devout persons, when devotions were more prevalent
than at present. Stones, pillars, obelisks, stumps of
trees, upright stones have all the same signification, and
are means by which the male element was symbolised.

.h2
TRIADS

The Triune idea is to be found in the system of almost
every nation. All have their Trinity in Unity, three in
one, which can be distinctly recognised in the cross.
The Triad is the male or triple, the constitution of the
three persons of most sacred Trinity forming the Triune
system. In the analysis of the subject by Rawlinson,
we find the Trinity consisted of Asshur or Asher, associated
with Anu and Hea or Hoa. Asshur, the supreme god of
the Assyrians, represents the Phallus or central organ
or the Linga, the <i>membrum virile</i>. The cognomen Anu
was given to the right testis, while that of Hea designated
the left.

It was only natural that Asshur being deified, his
appendages should be deified also. “Beltus,” says
Inman, “was the goddess associated with them, the four
together made up Arba or Arba-il, the four great gods,”
the Trinity in Unity. The idea thus broached receives
// 19.png
.bn 19.png
.pn +1
great confirmation when we examine the particular stress
laid in ancient times respecting the right and left side of
the body in connection with the Triad names given to
offspring mentioned in the scriptures with the titles given
to Anu and Hea. The male or active principle was typified
by the idea of “solidity” and “firmness,” and the
females or passive by the principles of “water,” “softness,”
and other feminine principles. Thus the goddess
Hea was associated with water, and according to Forlong,
the Serpent, the ruler of the Abyss, was sometimes represented
to be the great Hea, without whom there was no
creation or life, and whose godhead embraced also the
female element water.

Rawlinson also gives a similar conclusion, and states
as far as he could determine the third divinity or left side
was named Hea, and he considered this deity to correspond
to Neptune. Neptune was the presiding deity of the deep,
ruler of the abyss, and king of the rivers. As Darwin
and his coadjutors teach, mankind, in common with all
animal life, originally sprung from the sea; so physiology
teaches that each individual had origin in a pond of water.
The fruit of man is both solid and fluid. It was natural
to imagine that the two male appendages had a distinct
duty, that one formed the infant, the other water in which
it lived, that one generated the male, the other the female
offspring; and the inference was then drawn that water
must be feminine, the emblem of all possible powers of
creation.

It will be seen that the names and signification of the
gods and their attributes had no ideal meaning. Thus in
Genesis xxx. 13, we find Asher given as a personality,
which signifies “to be straight,” “upright,” “fortunate,”
“happy.” Asher was the supreme god of the Assyrians,
// 20.png
.bn 20.png
.pn +1
the Vedic Mahadeva, the emblem of the human male
structure and creative energy. The same idea of the
creator is still to be seen in India, Egypt, Phœnicia, the
Mediterranean, Europe, and Denmark, depicted on stone
relics.

To a rude and ignorant people, enslaved with such a
religion, it was an easy step from the crude to the more
refined sign, from the offensive to a more pictured and
less obnoxious symbol, from the plain and self-evident
to the mixed, disguised, and mystified, from the unclothed
privy member to the cross.

.h2
THE CROSS

The Triad, or Trinity, has been traced to Phœnicia,
Egypt, Japan, and India; the triple deities Asshur, Anu,
and Hea forming the “tau.” This mark of the Christians,
Greeks, and Hebrews became the sign or type of the
deities representing the Phallic trinity, and in time became
the figure of the cross. It is remarked by Payne Knight
that “The male organs of generation are sometimes found
represented by signs of the same sort, which properly
should be called the symbol of symbols. One of the most
remarkable of these is a cross, in the form of the letter
(T), which thus served as the emblem of creation and
generation before the Church adopted it as a sign of
salvation.”

Another writer says, “Reverse the position of the
triple deities Asshur, Anu, Hea, and we have the figure
of the ancient ‘tau’ of the Christians, Greeks, and ancient
Hebrews. It is one of the oldest conventional forms of
// 21.png
.bn 21.png
.pn +1
the cross. It is also met with in Gallic, Oscan, Arcadian,
Etruscan, original Egyptian, Phœnician, Ethiopic, and
Pelasgian forms. The Ethiopic form of the ‘tau’ is the
exact prototype and image of the cross, or rather, to state
the fact in order of merit and time, the cross is made in
the exact image of the Ethiopic ‘tau.’ The fig-leaf,
having three lobes to it, became a symbol of the triad.
As the male genital organs were held in early times
to exemplify the actual male creative power, various
natural objects were seized upon to express the theistic
idea, and at the same time point to those parts of the human
form. Hence, a similitude was recognised in a pillar,
a heap of stones, a tree between two rocks, a club between
two pine cones, a trident, a thyrsus tied round with two
ribbons with the two ends pendant, a thumb and two
fingers, the caduceus. Again, the conspicuous part of
the sacred triad Asshur is symbolised by a single stone
placed upright—the stump of a tree, a block, a tower,
spire, minaret, pole, pine, poplar, or palm tree, while
eggs, apples, or citrons, plums, grapes, and the like
represented the remaining two portions, altogether called
Phallic emblems. Baal-Shalisha is a name which seems
designed to perpetuate the triad, since it signifies ‘my
Lord the Trinity,’ or ‘my God is three.’”

We must not omit to mention other Phallic emblems,
such as the bull, the ram, the goat, the serpent, the torch,
fire, a knobbed stick, the crozier; and still further personified,
as Bacchus, Priapus, Dionysius, Hercules,
Hermes, Mahadeva, Siva, Osiris, Jupiter, Moloch, Baal,
Asher, and others.

If Ezekiel is to be credited, the triad, T, as Asshur,
Anu, and Hea, was made of gold and silver, and was in
his day not symbolically used, but actually employed;
// 22.png
.bn 22.png
.pn +1
for he bluntly says “whoredom was committed with the
images of men,” or, as the marginal note has it, images
of “a male” (Ezek. xvi. 17). It was with this god-mark—a
cross in the form of the letter T—that Ezekiel was
directed to stamp the foreheads of the men of Judæa
who feared the Lord (Ezek. ix. 4).

That the cross, or crucifix, has a sexual origin we
determine by a similar rule of research to that by which
comparative anatomists determine the place and habits of
an animal by a single tooth. The cross is a metaphoric
tooth which belongs to an antique religious body physical,
and that essentially human. A study of some of the
earliest forms of faith will lift the veil and explain the
mystery.

India, China, and Egypt have furnished the world with
a <i>genus</i> of religion. Time and culture have divided and
modified it into many species and countless varieties.
However much the imagination was allowed to play upon
it, the animus of that religion was sexuality—worship
of the generative principle of man and nature, male and
female. The cross became the emblem of the male
feature, under the term of the <i>triad</i>—three in one. The
female was the <i>unit</i>; and, joined to the male triad, constituted
a sacred four. Rites and adoration were sometimes
paid to the male, sometimes to the female, or to the two
in one.

So great was the veneration of the cross among the
ancients that it was carried as a Phallic symbol in the
religious processions of the Egyptians and Persians.
Higgins also describes the cross as used from the earliest
times of Paganism by the Egyptians as a banner, above
which was carried the device of the Egyptian cities.

The cross was also used by the ancient Druids, who held
// 23.png
.bn 23.png
.pn +1
it as a sacred emblem. In Egypt it stood for the signification
of eternal life. Schedeus describes it as customary
for the Druids “to seek studiously for an oak tree, large
and handsome, growing up with <i>two principal arms in
the form of a cross</i>, besides the main stem upright. If
the two horizontal arms are not sufficiently adapted to
the figure, they fasten a <i>cross-beam</i> to it. This tree they
consecrate in this manner: Upon the right branch they
cut in the bark, in fair characters, the word ‘Hesus’;
upon the middle, or upright stem, the word ‘Taranius’;
upon the left branch ‘Belenus’; over this, above the
going off of the arms, they cut the name of the god <i>Thau</i>;
under all, the same repeated, <i>Thau</i>.”

.h2
YONI

There is in Hindostan an emblem of great sanctity,
which is known as the “Linga-Yoni.” It consists of
a simple pillar in the centre of a figure resembling the
outline of a conical ear-ring. It is expressive of the female
genital organ both in shape and idea. The Greek letter
“Delta” is also expressive of it, signifying the door of a
house.

Yoni is of Sanskrit origin. Yanna, or Yoni, means
(1) the vulva, (2) the womb, (3) the place of birth, (4)
origin, (5) water, (6) a mine, a hole, or pit. As Asshur
and Jupiter were the representatives of the male potency,
so Juno and Venus were representatives of the female
attribute. Moore, in his “Oriental Fragments,” says:
“Oriental writers have generally spelled the word,
‘Yoni,’ which I prefer to write ‘IOni.’ As Lingam
// 24.png
.bn 24.png
.pn +1
was the vocalised cognomen of the male organ, or deity,
so IOni was that of hers.” Says R. P. Knight: “The
female organs of generation were revered as symbols
of the generative powers of nature or of matter, as those
of the male were of the generative powers of God. They
are usually represented emblematically by the shell
<i>Concna[**Concha?] Veneris</i>, which was therefore worn by devout
persons of antiquity, as it still continues to be by the
pilgrims of many of the common people of Italy” (“On
the worship of Priapus,” p. 28).

If Asshur, the conspicuous feature of the male Creator,
is supplied with types and representative figures of himself,
so the female feature is furnished with substitutes and
typical imagery of herself.

One of these is technically known as the <i>sistrum</i> of
Isis. It is the virgin’s symbol. The bars across the
<i>fenestrum</i>, or opening, are bent so that they cannot be
taken out, and indicate that the door is closed. It signifies
that the mother is still <i>virgo intacta</i>—a truly immaculate
female—if the truth can be strained to so denominate
a <i>mother</i>. The pure virginity of the Celestial Mother
was a tenet of faith for 2,000 years before the accepted
Virgin Mary now adored was born. We might infer
that Solomon was acquainted with the figure of the
<i>sistrum</i>, when he said, “A garden enclosed is my spouse,
a spring shut up, a <i>fountain sealed</i>” (Song of Sol. iv. 12).
The <i>sistrum</i>, we are told, was only used in the worship
of Isis, to drive away Typhon (evil).

The Argha is a contrite form, or boat-shaped dish or
plate used as a sacrificial cup in the worship of Astarte,
Isis, and Venus. Its shape portrays its own significance.
The Argha and <i>crux ansata</i> were often seen on Egyptian
monuments, and yet more frequently on bas-reliefs.
// 25.png
.bn 25.png
.pn +1

Equivalent to Iao, or the Lingam, we find Ab, the
Father, the Trinity; Asshur, Anu, Hea, Abraham, Adam,
Esau, Edom, Ach, Sol, Helios (Greek for Sun), Dionysius,
Bacchus, Apollo, Hercules, Brahma, Vishnu, Siva, Jupiter,
Zeus, Aides, Adonis, Baal, Osiris, Thor, Oden; the cross,
tower, spire, pillar, minaret, tolmen, and a host of others;
while the Yoni was represented by IO, Isis, Astarte, Juno,
Venus, Diana, Artemis, Aphrodite, Hera, Rhea, Cybele,
Ceres, Eve, Frea, Frigga; the queen of Heaven, the oval,
the trough, the delta, the door, the ark, the ship, the
chasm, a ring, a lozenge, cave, hole, pit, Celestial Virgin,
and a number of other names. Lucian, who was an
Assyrian, and visited the temple of Dea Syria, near the
Euphrates, says there are two Phalli standing in the porch
with this inscription on them, “These Phalli I, Bacchus,
dedicate to my step-mother Juno.”

The Papal religion is essentially the feminine, and built
on the ancient Chaldean basis. It clings to the female
element in the person of the Virgin Mary. Naphtali
(Gen. xxx. 8) was a descendant of such worshippers,
if there be any meaning in a concrete name. Bear in mind,
names and pictures perpetuate the faith of many peoples.
Neptoah is Hebrew for “the vulva,” and, Al or El being
God, one of the unavoidable renderings of Naphtali is
“the Yoni is my God,” or “I worship the Celestial
Virgin.” The Philistine towns generally had names
strongly connected with sexual ideas. Ashdod, <i>aish</i> or
<i>esh</i>, means “fire, heat,” and <i>dod</i> means “love, to love,”
“boiled up,” “be agitated,” the whole signifying “the
heat of love,” or “the fire which impels to union.”
Could not those people exclaim, Our “God is love”?
(1 John iv. 8).

The amatory drift of Solomon’s song is undisguised,
// 26.png
.bn 26.png
.pn +1
though the language is dressed in the habiliments of seeming
decency. The burden of thought of most of it bears
direct reference to the Linga-Yoni. He makes a woman
say, “He shall lie all night betwixt my breasts” (S. of S.
i. 13). Again, of the Phallus, or Linga, she says, “I
will go up the palm-tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof” (vii. 8). Palm-tree and boughs are euphemisms
of the male genitals.

.h2
HEBREW PHALLICISM

The nations surrounding the Jews practising the
Phallic rites and worshipping the Phallic deities, it is not
to be supposed that the Jews escaped their influence.
It is indeed certain that the worship of the Phallics was a
great and important part of the Hebrew worship.

This will be the more plainly seen when we bear in
mind the importance given to circumcision as a covenant
between God and man. Another equally suggestive
custom among the Patriarchs was the act of taking the
oath, or making a sacred promise, which is commented
upon by Dr. Ginsingburg in Kitto’s <i>Cyclopædia</i>. He says:
“Another primitive custom which obtained in the
patriarchal age was, that the one who took the oath put
his hand under the thigh of the adjurer (Gen. xxiv. 2,
and xlvii. 29). This practice evidently arose from the
fact that the genital member, which is meant by the euphemistic
expression <i>thigh</i>, was regarded as the most sacred
part of the body, being the symbol of union in the tenderest
relation of matrimonial life, and the seat whence all issue
// 27.png
.bn 27.png
.pn +1
proceeds and the perpetuity so much coveted by the
ancients. Compare Gen. xlvi. 26; Exod. i. 5; Judges
vii. 30. Hence the creative organ became the symbol
of the <i>Creator</i>, and the object of worship among all
nations of antiquity. It is for this reason that God
claimed it as a sign of the covenant between himself
and his chosen people in the rite of circumcision. Nothing
therefore could render the oath more solemn in those days
than touching the symbol of creation, the sign of the
covenant, and the source of that issue who may at any
future period avenge the breaking a compact made with
their progenitor.” From this we learn that Abraham,
himself a Chaldee, had reverence for the Phallus as an
emblem of the Creator. We also learn that the rite of
circumcision touches Phallic or Lingasic worship. From
Herodotus we are informed that the Syrians learned
circumcision from the Egyptians, as did the Hebrews.
Says Dr. Inman: “I do not know anything which
illustrates the difference between ancient and modern
times more than the frequency with which circumcision is
spoken of in the sacred books, and the carefulness with
which the subject is avoided now.”

The mutilation of male captives, as practised by Saul
and David, was another custom among the worshippers
of Baal, Asshur, and other Phallic deities. The practice
was to debase the victims and render them unfit to take
part in the worship and mysteries. Some idea can be
formed of the esteem in which people in former times
cherished the male or Phallic emblems of creative power
when we note the sway that power exercised over them.
If these organs were lost or disabled, the unfortunate one
was unfitted to meet in the congregation of the Lord,
and disqualified to minister in the holy temples. Excessive
// 28.png
.bn 28.png
.pn +1
punishment was inflicted upon the person who had the
temerity to injure the sacred structure. If a woman were
guilty of inflicting injury, her hand was cut off without
pity (Deut. xxv. 12). The great object of veneration
in the Ark of the Covenant was doubtless a Phallic
emblem, a symbol of the preservation of the germ of
life.

In the historical and prophetic books of the Old
Testament we have repeated evidence that the Hebrew
worship was a mixture of Paganism and Judaism, and
that Jehovah was worshipped in connection with other
deities. Hezekiah is recorded in 2 Kings xviii. 3, to
have “removed the high places, and broken the images,
and cut down the groves (Ashera), and broken in pieces
the brazen serpent that Moses had made, for unto those
days the children of Israel did burn incense to it.” The
Ashera, or sacred groves here alluded to are named
from the goddess Ashtaroth, which Dr. Smith describes
as the proper name of the goddess; while Ashera is the
name of the image of the goddess. Rawlinson, in his
<i>Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient World</i>, describes
Ashera to imply something that stood straight up, and
probably its essential element was the stem of a tree,
an analogy suggestive of the Assyrian emblem of the
Tree of Life of the Scriptures. This stem, which stood
for the emblem of life, was probably a pillar, or Phallus,
like the Lingi of the Hindus, sometimes erected in a grove
or sacred hollow, signifying the Yoni and Lingi. We
read in 2 Kings xxi. 7, that Manasseh “set up a graven
image in the grove,” and, according to Dr. Oort, the older
reading is in 2 Chron. xxxiii. 7, 15, where it is an image
or pillar. During the reigns of the Jewish kings, the
worship of Baal, the Priapus of the Greeks and Romans,
// 29.png
.bn 29.png
.pn +1
was extensively practised by the Jews. Pillars and
groves were reared in his name.

In front of the Temple of Baal, in Samaria, was erected
an Ashera (1 Kings xvi. 31, 32) which even survived
the temple itself, for although Jehu destroyed the Temple
of Baal, he allowed the Ashera to remain (2 Kings x.
18, 19; xiii. 6). Bernstein, in an important work on
the origin of the legends of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
undoubtedly proves that during the monarchial period
of Israel, the sanguinary wars and violent conflicts between
the two kingdoms of Judah and Israel were between
the Elohistic and Jehovahic faiths, kept alive by the
priesthood at the chief places of worship, concerning the
true patriarch, and each party manufacturing and inserting
legends to give a more ancient and important part to its
own faith.

It is not at all improbable that the conflict was between
the two portions of the Phallic faith, the Lingam and
Yoni parties. The cause of this conflict was the erection
of the consecrated stones or pillars which were put up
by the Hebrews as objects of Divine worship. The altar
erected by Jacob at Bethel was a pillar, for according
to Bernstein the word altar can only be used for the erection
of a pillar. Jacob likewise set up a Matzebah, or pillar
of stone, in Gilead, and finally he set one up upon the
tomb of Rachel.

A great portion of the facts have been suppressed by
the translators, who have given to the world histories
which have glossed over the ancient rites and practices
of the Jews.

An instance is given by Forlong on the important
word “Rock or Stone,” a Phallic emblem to which the
Jews addressed their devotions. He says, “It should
// 30.png
.bn 30.png
.pn +1
not be, but I fear it is, necessary to explain to mere English
readers of the Old Testament that the <i>Stone</i> or <i>Rock Tsur</i>
was <i>the real old god of all Arabs, Jews, and Phœnicians</i>,
that this would be clear to Christians were the Jewish
writings translated according to the first ideas of the
people and <i>Rock</i> used as it ought to be, instead of ‘God,’
‘Theos,’ ‘Lord,’ etc., being written where Tsur occurs.
Numerous instances of this are given in Dr. Ort’s worship
of Baal in Israel, where praises, addresses, and adorations
are addressed to the <i>Rock</i>, instance, Deut. xxxii. 4, 18.
Stone pillars were also used by the Hebrews as a memorial
of a sacred covenant, for we find Jacob setting up a pillar
as a witness, that he would not pass over it. Connected
with this pillar worship is the ceremony of anointing
by pouring oil upon the pillar, as practised by Jacob
at Bethel. According to Sir W. Forbes, in his <i>Oriental
Memoirs</i>, the ”pouring of oil upon a stone is practised
at this day upon many a shapeless stone throughout
Hindostan.”

Toland gives a similar account of the Druids as practising
the same rite, and describes many of the stones found in
England as having a cavity at the top made to receive the
offering. The worship of Baal like the worship of
Priapus was attended with prostitution, and we find the
Jews having a similar custom to the Babylonians.

Payne Knight gives the following account of it in his
work: “The women of every rank and condition held
it to be an indispensable duty of religion to prostitute
themselves once in their lives in her temple to any stranger
who came and offered money, which, whether little or
much, was accepted, and applied to a sacred purpose.
Women sat in the temple of Venus awaiting the selection
of the stranger, who had the liberty of choosing whom
// 31.png
.bn 31.png
.pn +1
he liked. A woman once seated must remain until she
has been selected by a piece of silver being cast into her
lap, and the rite performed outside the temple.”

Similar customs existed in Armenia, Phrygia, and even
in Palestine, and were a feature of the worship of Baal
Peor. The Hebrew prophets described and denounced
these excesses which had the same characteristics as the
rites of the Babylonian priesthood. The identical
custom is referred to in 1 Sam. ii. 22, where “the sons of
Eli lay with the women that assembled at the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation.”

Words and history corroborate each other, or are apt
to do so if contemporaneous. Thus <i>kadesh</i>, or <i>kaesh</i>,
designate in Hebrew “a consecrated one,” and history
tells the unworthy tale in descriptive plainness, as will
be shown in the sequel.

That the religion was dominating and imperative is
determined by Deut. xvii. 12, where presumptuous
refusal to listen to the priest was death to the offender.
To us it is inconceivable that the indulgence of passion
could be associated with religion, but so it was. Much
as it is covered over by altered words and substituted
expressions in the Bible—an example of which see <i>men</i>
for male organ, Ezek. xvi. 17—it yet stands out offensively
bold. The words expressive of “sanctuary,” “consecrated,”
and “Sodomite,” are in the Hebrew essentially
the same. They indicate the passion of amatory devotion.
It is among the Hindus of to-day as it was in Greece and
Italy of classic times; and we find that “holy women”
is a title given to those who devote their bodies to be used
for hire, the price of which hire goes to the service of the
temple.

As a general rule, we may assume that priests who make
// 32.png
.bn 32.png
.pn +1
or expound the laws, which they declare to be from God,
are men, and, consequently, through all time, have
thought, and do think, of the gratification of the masculine
half of humanity. The ancient and modern Orientals
are not exceptions. They lay it down as a momentous
fact that virginity is the most precious of all the possessions
of a woman, and, being so, it ought, in some way or
other, to be devoted to God.

Throughout India, and also through the densely
inhabited parts of Asia, and modern Turkey there is a
class of females who dedicate themselves to the service
of the deity whom they adore; and the rewards accruing
from their prostitution are devoted to the service of the
temple and the priests officiating therein.

The temples of the Hindus in the Dekkan possessed
their establishments. They had bands of consecrated
dancing-girls called the <i>Women of the Idol</i>, selected in their
infancy by the priests for the beauty of their persons, and
trained up with every elegant accomplishment that could
render them attractive.

We also find David and the daughters of Shiloh performing
a wild and enticing dance; likewise we have the
leaping of the prophets of Baal.

It is again significant that a great proportion of Bible
names relate to “divine,” sexual, generative, or creative
power; such as Alah, “the strong one”; Ariel, “the
strong Jas is El”; Amasai, “Jah is firm”; Asher,
“the male” or “the upright organ”; Elijah, “El is
Jah”; Eliab, “the strong father”; Elisha, “El is
upright”; Ara, “the strong one,” “the hero”; Aram,
“high,” or, “to be uncovered”; Baal Shalisha, “my
Lord the trinity,” or “my God is three”; Ben-zohett,
“son of firmness”; Camon, “the erect One”; Cainan,
// 33.png
.bn 33.png
.pn +1
“he stands upright”; these are only a few of the many
names of a similar signification.

It will be seen, from what has been given, that the Jews,
like the Phœnicians (if they were not the same), had the
same ceremonies, rites, and gods as the surrounding
nations, but enough has been said to show that Phallic
worship was much practised by the Jews. It was very
doubtful whether the Jehovah-worship was not of a
monotheistic character, but those who desire to have a
further insight into the mysteries of the wars between the
tribes should consult Bernstein’s valuable work.

.h2
EARTH MOTHER

The following interesting chapter is taken from a
valuable book issued a few years ago anonymously:

/#
“Mother Earth” is a legitimate expression, only of
the most general type. Religious genius gave the female
quality to the earth with a special meaning. When once
the idea obtained that our world was <i>feminine</i>, it was
easy to induce the faithful to believe that natural chasms
were typical of that part which characterises woman.
As at birth the new being emerges from the mother,
so it was supposed that emergence from a terrestrial
cleft was equivalent to a new birth. In direct proportion
to the resemblance between the sign and the thing signified
was the sacredness of the chink, and the amount of virtue
which was imparted by passing through it. From natural
caverns being considered holy, the veneration for apertures
in stones, as being equally symbolical, was a natural
#/
// 34.png
.bn 34.png
.pn +1
/#
transition. Holes, such as we refer to, are still to be seen
in those structures which are called Druidical, both in
the British Isles and in India. It is impossible to say
when these first arose; it is certain that they survive in
India to this day. We recognise the existence of the
emblem among the Jews in Isaiah li. 1, in the charge to
look “to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged.” We
have also an indication that chasms were symbolical
among the same people in Isaiah lvii. 5, where the wicked
among the Jews were described as “inflaming themselves
with idols under every green tree, and slaying the children
in the valleys under the clefts of the rocks.” It is possible
that the “hole in the wall” (Ezek. viii. 7) had a similar
signification. In modern Rome, in the vestibule of the
church close to the Temple of Vesta, I have seen a large
<i>perforated stone</i>, in the hole of which the ancient Romans
are said to have placed their hands when they swore a
solemn oath, in imitation, or, rather, a counterpart, of
Abraham swearing his servant upon his thigh—that is
the male organ. Higgins dwells upon these holes, and
says: “These stones are so placed as to have a hole under
them, through which devotees passed for religious
purposes. There is one of the same kind in Ireland,
called St. Declau’s stone. In the mass of rocks at Bramham
Crags there is a place made for the devotees to pass
through. We read in the accounts of Hindostan that
there is a very celebrated place in Upper India, to which
immense numbers of pilgrims go, to pass through a place
in the mountains called “The Cow’s Belly.” In the
Island of Bombay, at Malabar Hill, there is a rock upon
the surface of which there is a natural crevice, which
communicates with a cavity opening below. This place
is used by the Gentoos as a purification of their sins,
#/
// 35.png
.bn 35.png
.pn +1
/#
which they say is effected by their going in at the opening
below, and emerging at the cavity above—“born again.”
The ceremony is in such high repute in the neighbouring
countries that the famous Conajee Angria ventured by
stealth, one night, upon the Island, on purpose to perform
the ceremony, and got off undiscovered. The early
Christians gave them a bad name, as if from envy; they
called these holes “Cunni Diaboli” (<i>Anacalypsis</i>, p. 346)[**missing .]
#/

.h2
BACCHANALIA AND LIBERALIA FESTIVALS

The Romans called the feasts of Bacchus, Bacchanalia
and Liberalia, because Bacchus and Liber were the names
for the same god, although the festivals were celebrated
at different times and in a somewhat different manner.
The latter, according to Payne Knight, was celebrated
on the 17th of March, with the most licentious gaiety,
when an image of the Phallus was carried openly in
triumph. These festivities were more particularly celebrated
among the rural or agricultural population, who,
when the preparatory labour of the agriculturist was over,
celebrated with joyful activity Nature’s reproductive
powers, which in due time was to bring forth the fruits.
During the festival a car containing a huge Phallus was
drawn along accompanied by its worshippers, who indulged
in obscene songs and dances of wild and extravagant
character. The gravest and proudest matrons
suddenly laid aside their decency and ran screaming
among the woods and hills half-naked, with dishevelled
hair, interwoven with which were pieces of ivy or vine.
// 36.png
.bn 36.png
.pn +1
The Bacchanalian feasts were celebrated in the latter part
of October when the harvest was completed. Wine and
figs were carried in the procession of the Bacchants, and
lastly came the Phalli, followed by honourable virgins,
called <i>canephorœ</i>, who carried baskets of fruit. These were
followed by a company of men who carried poles, at the
end of which were figures representing the organ of
generation. The men sung the Phallica and were crowned
with violets and ivy, and had their faces covered with
other kinds of herbs. These were followed by some
dressed in women’s apparel, striped with white, reaching
to their ancles, with garlands on their heads, and wreaths
of flowers in their hands, imitating by their gestures the
state of inebriety. The priestesses ran in every direction
shouting and screaming, each with a thyrsus in their
hands. Men and women all intermingled, dancing and
frolicking with suggestive gesticulations. Deodorus says
the festivals were carried into the night, and it was then
frenzy reached its height. He says, “In performing
the solemnity virgins carry the thyrsus, and run about
frantic, halloing ‘Evoe’ in honour of the god; then
the women in a body offer the sacrifices, and roar out the
praises of Bacchus in song as if he were present, in imitation
of the ancient Mænades, who accompanied him.” These
festivities were carried into the night, and as the celebrators
became heated with wine, they degenerated into extreme
licentiousness.

Similar enthusiastic frenzy was exhibited at the Lupercalian
Feasts instituted in honour of the god Pan (under
the shape of a Goat) whose priests, according to Owen in
his <i>Worship of Serpents</i>, on the morning of the Feast ran
naked through the streets, striking the married women
they met on the hands and belly, which was held as an
// 37.png
.bn 37.png
.pn +1
omen promising fruitfulness. The nymphs performing
the same ostentatious display as the Bacchants at the
festival of Bacchanalia.

The festival of Venus was celebrated towards the beginning
of April, and the Phallus was again drawn in a car,
followed by a procession of Roman women to the temple
of Venus. Says a writer, “The loose women of the town
and its neighbourhood, called together by the sounding
of horns, mixed with the multitude in perfect nakedness,
and excited their passions with obscene motions and
language until the festival ended in a scene of mad revelry,
in which all restraint was laid aside.”

It is said that these festivals took their rise from Egypt,
from whence they were brought into Greece by Metampus,
where the triumph of Osiris was celebrated with secret
rites, and from thence the Bacchanals drew their original;
and from the feasts instituted by Isis came the orgies of
Bacchus.

.h2
DRUID AND HEBREW FAITHS

It seems not at all improbable that the deities worshipped
by the ancient Britons and the Irish, were no
other then the Phallic deities of the ancient Syrians and
Greeks, and also the Baal of the Hebrews. Dionysius
Periegites, who lived in the time of Augustus Cæsar,
states that the rites of Bacchus were celebrated in the
British Isles; while Strabo, who lived in the time of
Augustus and Tiberius, asserts that a much earlier writer
described the worship of the Cabiri to have come originally
// 38.png
.bn 38.png
.pn +1
from Phœnicia. Higgins, in his History of the Druids,
says, the supreme god above the rest was called <i>Seodhoc
and Baal</i>[**ital. “and” unintentional?]. The name of Baal is found both in Wales,
Gaul, and Germany, and is the same as the Hebrew Baal.

The same god, according to O’Brien, was the chief deity
of the Irish, in whose honour the round towers were
erected, which structures the ancient Irish themselves
designated Bail-toir, or the towers of Baal. In Numbers,
xxii[**P3: .], will be found a mention of a similar pillar consecrated
to Baal. Many of the same customs and superstitions
that existed among the Druids and ancient Irish, will
likewise be found among the Israelites. On the first
day of May, the Irish made great fires in honour of Baal,
likewise offering him sacrifices. A similar account is
given of a custom of the Druids by Toland, in an account
of the festival of the fires; he says:—“on May-day eve
the Druids made prodigious fires on these carns[**P3: cairns], which
being everyone in sight of some other, could not but
afford a glorious show over a whole nation.” These
fires are said to be lit even to the present day by the
Aboriginal Irish, on the first of May, called by them
Bealtine, or the day of Belan’s fire, the same name as
given them in the Highlands of Scotland.

A similar practice to this will be noticed as mentioned in
the II Book of Kings, where the Canaanites in their worship
of Baal, are said to have passed their children through the
fire of Baal, which seems to have been a common practice,
as Ahaz, King of Israel, is blamed for having done the
same thing. Higgins in his <i>Anacalypsis</i>, says this superstitious
custom still continues, and that on “particular
days great fires are lighted, and the fathers taking the
children in their arms, jump or run through them, and
thus pass their children through them; they also light
// 39.png
.bn 39.png
.pn +1
two fires at a little distance from each other, and drive
their cattle between them.” It will be found on reference
to Deuteronomy, that this very practice is specially forbidden.
In the rites of Numa, we have also the sacred
fire of the Irish; of St. Bridget, of Moses, of Mithra,
and of India, accompanied with an establishment of
nuns or vestal virgins. A sacred fire is said to have been
kept burning by the nuns of Kildare, which was established
by St. Bridget. This fire was never blown with the
mouth, that it might not be polluted, but only with
bellows; this fire was similar to that of the Jews, kept
burning only with peeled wood, and never blown with
the mouth. Hyde describes a similar fire which was kept
burning in the same way by the ancient Persians, who
kept their sacred fire fed with a certain tree called Hawm
Mogorum; and Colonel Vallancey says the sacred fire
of the Irish was fed with the wood of the tree called
Hawm. Ware, the Romish priest, relates that at Kildare,
the glorious Bridget was rendered illustrious by many
miracles, amongst which was the sacred fire, which had
been kept burning by nuns ever since the time of the
Virgin.

The earliest sacred places of the Jews were evidently
sacred stones, or stone circles, succeeded in time by
temples. These early rude stones, emblems of the
Creator, were erected by the Israelites, which in no way
differed from the erections of the Gentiles. It will be
found that the Jews to commemorate a great victory,
or to bear witness of the Lord, were all signfied[**P3: signified] by stones:
thus, Joshua erected a stone to bear witness; Jacob
put up a stone to make a place sacred; Abel set up the
same for a place of worship; Samuel erected a stone as
a boundary, which was to be the token of an agreement
// 40.png
.bn 40.png
.pn +1
made in the name of God. Even Maundrel in his travels
names several that he saw in Palestine. It is curious that
where a pillar was erected there, sometime after, a temple
was put up in the same manner that the Round Towers
of Ireland were,—always near a church, but never formed
part of it. We find many instances in the Scriptures of the
erection of a number of stones among the early Israelites,
which would lead us to conclude that it was not at all
unlikely that the early places of worship among them, were
similar to the temples found in various parts of Great
Britain and Ireland. It is written in Exodus xxiv. 4,
that Moses rose up early in the morning, and builded
an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, according to
the twelve tribes of Israel, were erected. It is also
given out that when the children of Israel should pass
over the Jordan, unto the land which the Lord giveth
them, they should set up great stones, and plaster them
with plaster, and also the words of the law were to be
written thereon. In many other places stones were
ordered to be set up in the name of the Lord, and repeated
instances are given that the stones should be twelve
in number and unhewn.

Stone temples seem to have been erected in all countries
of the world, and even in America, where, among the
early American races are to be found customs, superstitions,
and religious objects of veneration, similar to the
Phœnicians. An American writer says:—“There is
sufficient evidence that the religious customs of the
Mexicans, Peruvians and other American races, are
nearly identical with those of the ancient Phœnicians....
We moreover discover that many of their religious terms
have, etymologically, the same origin.” Payne Knight,
in his Worship of Priapus, devotes much of his work to
// 41.png
.bn 41.png
.pn +1
show that the temples erected at Stonehenge and other
places, were of a Phœnician origin, which was simply
a temple of the god Bacchus.

.h2
STONEHENGE A TEMPLE OF BACCHUS

Of all the nations of antiquity the Persians were the
most simple and direct in the worship of the Creator.
They were the puritans of the heathen world, and not
only rejected all images of God and his agents, but also
temples and altars, according to Herodotus, whose
authority we prefer to any other, because he had an
opportunity of conversing with them before they had
adopted any foreign superstitions. As they worshipped
the ethereal fire without any medium of personification
or allegory, they thought it unworthy of the dignity of
the god to be represented by any definite form, or circumscribed
to any particular place. The universe was
his temple, and the all-pervading element of fire his only
symbol. The Greeks appear originally to have held
similar opinions, for they were long without statues
and Pausanias speaks of a temple at Siciyon, built by
Adrastus—who lived in an age before the Trojan war—which
consisted of columns only, without wall or roof,
like the Celtic temples of our northern ancestors, or the
Phyrœtheia of the Persians, which were circles of stones
in the centre of which was kindled the sacred fire, the
symbol of the god. Homer frequently speaks of places
of worship consisting of an area and altar only, which were
probably enclosures like those of the Persians, with an
// 42.png
.bn 42.png
.pn +1
altar in the centre. The temples dedicated to the creator
Bacchus, which the Greek architects called <i>hypœthral</i>,
seem to have been anciently of this kind, whence probably
came the title (“surround with columns”) attributed
to that god in the Orphic litanies. The remains of one of
these are still extant at Puzznoli, near Naples, which the
inhabitants call the temple of Serapis; but the ornaments
of grapes, vases, etc., found among the ruins, prove it
to have been of Bacchus. Serapis was indeed the same
deity worshipped under another form, being usually a
personification of the sun. The architecture is of the
Roman times; but the ground plan is probably that of a
very ancient one, which this was made to replace—for
it exactly resembles that of a Celtic temple in Zeeland,
published in Stukeley’s <i>Itinerary</i>. The ranges of square
buildings which enclose it are not properly parts of the
temple, but apartments of the priests, places for victims
and sacred utensils, and chapels dedicated to the subordinate
deities, introduced by a more complicated and
corrupt worship and probably unknown to the founder
of the original edifice. The portico, which runs parallel
with these buildings, encloses the <i>temenss</i>[**temenos ?], or area of
sacred ground, which in the <i>pyrœtheia</i> of the Persians was
circular, but is here quadrangular, as in the Celtic temple
in Zeeland, and the Indian pagoda before described.
In the centre was the holy of holies, the seat of the god,
consisting of a circle of columns raised upon a basement,
without roof or walls, in the middle of which was probably
the sacred fire or some other symbol of the deity. The
square area in which it stood was sunk below the natural
level of the ground, and, like that of the Indian pagoda,
appears to have been occasionally floated with water;
the drains and conduits being still to be seen, as also several
// 43.png
.bn 43.png
.pn +1
fragments of sculpture representing waves, serpents, and
various aquatic animals, which once adorned the basement.
The Bacchus here worshipped, was, as we learn from the
Orphic hymn above cited, the sun in his character of
extinguisher of the fires which once pervaded the earth.
He is supposed to have done this by exhaling the waters
of the ocean and scattering them over the land, which was
thus supposed to have acquired its proper temperature
and fertility. For this reason the sacred fire, the essential
image of the god, was surrounded by the element which
was principally employed in giving effect to the beneficial
exertions of the great attribute.

From a passage of Hecatæus, preserved by Deodorus
Siculus, it seems evident that Stonehenge and all the monuments
of the same kind found in the north, belong to the
same religion which appears at some remote period to
have prevailed over the whole northern hemisphere.
According to that ancient historian, <i>the Hyperboreans
inhabited an island beyond Gaul, as large as Sicily, in which
Apollo was worshipped in a circular temple considerable for
its size and riches</i>. Apollo, we know, in the language of
the Greeks of that age, can mean no other than the sun,
which according to Cæsar was worshipped by the Germans,
when they knew of no other deities except fire and the
moon. The island can evidently be no other than Britain,
which at that time was only known to the Greeks by the
vague reports of the Phœnician mariners; and so uncertain
and obscure that Herodotus, the most inquisitive and
credulous of historians, doubts of its existence. The
circular temple of the sun being noticed in such slight and
imperfect accounts, proves that it must have been something
singular and important; for if it had been an
inconsiderable structure, it would not have been mentioned
// 44.png
.bn 44.png
.pn +1
at all; and if there had been many such in the country,
the historian would not have employed the singular
number.

Stonehenge has certainly been a circular temple, nearly
the same as that already described of the Bacchus at
Puzznoli, except that in the latter the nice execution and
beautiful symmetry of the parts are in every respect the
reverse of the rude but majestic simplicity of the former.
In the original design they differ but in the form of the
area. It may therefore be reasonably supposed that we
have still the ruins of the identical temple described by
Hecatæus, who, being an Asiatic Greek, might have
received his information from Phœnician merchants, who
had visited the interior parts of Britain when trading there
for tin. Anacrobius mentions a temple of the same kind
and form, upon Mount Zilmissus, in Thrace, dedicated
to the sun under the title of Bacchus Sebrazius. The
large obelisks of stone found in many parts of the north,
such as those at Rudstone, and near Boroughbridge, in
Yorkshire, belong to the same religion; obelisks being,
as Pliny observes, sacred to the sun, whose rays they
represented both by their form and name.—<i>Payne Knight’s
Worship of Priapus.</i>

.h2
BUNS AND RELIGIOUS CAKES

Says Hyslop:—“The hot cross-buns of Good Friday,
and the dyed eggs of Pasch or Easter Sunday, figured in
the Chaldean rites just as they do now. The buns known,
too, by that identical name, were used in the worship of the
// 45.png
.bn 45.png
.pn +1
Queen of Heaven, the goddess Easter (Ishtar or Astarte),
as early as the days of Cecrops, the founder of Athens,
1,500 years before the Christian era.” “One species of
bread,” says Bryant, “‘which used to be offered to the
gods, was of great antiquity, and called <i>Boun</i>.’ Diogenes
mentioned ‘they were made of flour and honey.’” It
appears that Jeremiah the Prophet was familiar with this
lecherous worship. He says:—“The children gather
wood, the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead
the dough to make cakes to the Queen of Heaven (Jer.
vii., 18). Hyslop does not add that the “buns” offered
to the Queen of Heaven, and in sacrifices to other deities,
were framed in the shape of the sexual organs, but that
they were so in ancient times we have abundance of
evidence.

Martial distinctly speaks of such things in two epigrams,
first, wherein the male organ is spoken of, second, wherein
the female part is commemorated; the cakes being made
of the finest flour, and kept especially for the palate of the
fair one.

Captain Wilford (“Asiatic Researches,” viii., p. 365)
says:—“When the people of Syracuse were sacrificing to
goddesses, they offered cakes called <i>mulloi</i>, shaped like the
female organ, and in some temples where the priestesses
were probably ventriloquists, they so far imposed on the
credulous multitude who came to adore the Vulva as to
make them believe that it spoke and gave oracles.”

We can understand how such things were allowed in
licentious Rome, but we can scarcely comprehend how
they were tolerated in Christian Europe, as, to all innocent
surprise we find they were, from the second part of the
“Remains of the Worship of Priapus”: that in Saintonge,
in the neighbourhood of La Rochelle, small cakes baked in
// 46.png
.bn 46.png
.pn +1
the form of the Phallus are made as offerings at Easter,
carried and presented from house to house. Dulare
states that in his time the festival of Palm Sunday, in the
town of Saintes, was called <i>le fete des pinnes</i>—feast of the
privy members—and that during its continuance the
women and children carried in the procession a Phallus
made of bread, which they called a <i>pinne</i>, at the end of their
palm branches; these <i>pinnes</i> were subsequently blessed
by priests, and carefully preserved by the women during
the year. Palm Sunday![**typographer error?] Palm, it is to be remembered,
is a euphemism of the male organ, and it is curious to see
it united with the Phallus in Christendom. Dulare also
says that, in some of the earlier inedited French books on
cookery, receipts are given for making cakes of the
salacious form in question, which are broadly named. He
further tells us those cakes symbolized the male, in Lower
Limousin, and especially at Brives; while the female
emblem was adopted at Clermont, in Auvergne, and other
places.

.h2
THE ARK AND GOOD FRIDAY

The ark of the covenant was a most sacred symbol in
the worship of the Jews, and like the sacred boat, or
ark of Osiris, contained the symbol of the principle of
life, or creative power. The symbol was preserved with
great veneration in a miniature tabernacle, which was
considered the special and sanctified abode of the god.
In size and manner of construction the ark of the Jews
and the sacred chest of Osiris of the Egyptians were
// 47.png
.bn 47.png
.pn +1
exactly alike, and were carried in processions in a similar
manner.

The ark or chest of Osiris was attended by the priests,
and was borne on the shoulders of men by means of
staves. The ark when taken from the temple was placed
upon a table, or stand, made expressly for the purpose,
and was attended by a procession similar to that which
followed the Jewish ark. According to Faber, the ark
was a symbol of the earth or female principle, containing
the germ of all animated nature, and regarded as the
great mother whence all things sprung. Thus the ark,
earth, and goddess, were represented by common symbols,
and spoken of in the old Testament as the “ashera.”

The sacred emblems carried in the ark of the Egyptians
were the Phallus, the Egg, and the Serpent; the first
representing the sun, fire, and male or generative principle—the
Creator; the second, the passive or female, the
germ of all animated things—the Preserver; and the
last the Destroyer: the Three of the sacred Trinity.
The Hindu women, according to Payne Knight, still
carry the lingam, or consecrated symbol of the generative
attribute of the deity, in solemn procession between two
serpents; and in a sacred casket, which held the Egg
and the Phallus in the mystic processions of the Greeks,
was also a Serpent.

“The ark,” says Faber, “was reverenced in all the
ancient religions.” It was often represented in the form of
a boat, or ship, as well as an oblong chest. The rites of
the Druids, with those of Phœnicia and Hindostan, show
that an ark, chest, cell, boat, or cavern, held an important
place in their mysteries. In the story of Osiris, like that
of the Siva, will be found the reason for the emblem being
carried in the sacred chest, and the explanation of one of
// 48.png
.bn 48.png
.pn +1
the mysteries of the Egyptian priests. It is said that
Osiris was torn to pieces by the wicked Typhon, who
after cutting up the body, distributed the parts over the
earth. Isis recovered the scattered limbs, and brought
them back to Egypt; but, being unable to find the part
which distinguished his sex, she had an image made of
wood, which was enshrined in an ark, and ordered to
be solemnly carried about in the festivals she had instituted
in his honour, and celebrated with certain secret rites.

The Egg, which accompanied the Phallus in the ark was
a very common symbol of the ancient faiths, which was
considered as containing the generation of life. The
image of that which generated all things in itself. Jacob
Bryant says:—“The Egg, as it contained the principles
of life was thought no improper emblem of the ark,
in which were preserved the future world. Hence in the
Dionysian and in other mysteries, one part of the nocturnal
ceremony consisted in the consecration of an egg.”
This egg was called the Mundane Egg.

The ark was likewise the symbol of salvation, the place
of safety, the secret receptacle of the divine wisdom.
Hence we find the ark of the Jews containing the tables
of the law; we find too that the Jews were ordered to
place in the ark Aaron’s rod, which budded, conveying
the idea of symbolised fertility: showing that the ark
was considered as the receptacle of the life principle—as
an emblem of the Creator.

With the Egyptians Osiris was supposed to be buried in
the ark, which represented the disappearance of the deity.
His loss, or death, constituted the first part of the mysteries,
which consisted of lamentations for his decease. After the
third day from his death, a procession went down to the
seaside in the night, carrying the ark with them. During
// 49.png
.bn 49.png
.pn +1
the passage they poured drink offerings from the river, and
when the ceremony had been duly performed, they raised a
shout that Osiris had again risen—that the dead had been
restored to life. After this followed the second or joyful
part of the mysteries. The similarity of this custom with
the Good Friday celebrations of the death of Jesus, and the
rejoicings on account of his resurrection on Easter Sunday,
will be at once observed. It is further said that the missing
part of Osiris was eaten by a fish, which made the fish a
sacred symbol. Thus we have the Ark, Fish, and Good
Friday brought together, also the Egg, for the origin of
the Easter eggs is very ancient. A bull is represented as
breaking an egg with his horn, which signified the
liberating of imprisoned life at the opening or spring of
the year, which had been destroyed by Typhon. The
opening of the year at that time commenced in the spring,
not according to our present reckoning; thus, the Egg
was a symbol of the resurrection of life at the spring, or
our Easter time. The author of the “Worship of the
Generative Powers,” describes the origin of the hot cross-bun
at Easter, which is a further parallelism of the Christian
and Pagan festivals. The author also draws a further
conclusion—that the cakes or buns have in reality a
Phallic origin, for in France and other parts, the Easter
cakes were called after the <i>membrum virile</i>. The writer
says:—“In the primitive Teutonic mythology, there
was a female deity named in old German, Ostara, and in
Anglo-Saxon, Eastre or Eostre; but all we know of her
is the simple statement of our father of history, Bede,
that her festival was celebrated by the ancient Saxons in
the month of April, from which circumstance that month
was named by the Anglo-Saxons, Easter-mona or Eoster-mona,
and that the name of the goddess had been frequently
// 50.png
.bn 50.png
.pn +1
given to the Paschal time, with which it was identical. The
name of this goddess was given to the same month by
the old Germans and by the Franks, so that she must have
been one of the most highly honoured of the Teutonic
deities, and her festival must have been a very important
one and deeply implanted in the popular feelings, or the
Church would not have sought to identify it with one of
the greatest Christian festivals of the year. It is understood
that the Romans considered this month as dedicated
to Venus, no doubt because it was that in which the
productive powers of nature began to be visibly developed.
When the Pagan festival was adopted by the Church, it
became a moveable feast, instead of being fixed to the
month of April. Among other objects offered to the
goddess at this time were cakes, made no doubt of fine
flour, but of their form we are ignorant. The Christians
when they seized upon the Easter festival, gave them the
form of a bun, which indeed was at that time the ordinary
form of bread; and to protect themselves and those who
ate them from any enchantment—or other evil influences
which might arise from their former heathen character—they
marked them with the Christian symbol—the cross.
Hence we derived the cakes we still eat at Easter under
the name of hot cross-buns, and the superstitious feelings
attached to them; for multitudes of people still believe
that if they failed to eat a hot cross-bun on Good Friday,
they would be unlucky all the rest of the year.”
// 51.png
.bn 51.png
.pn +1

.h2
ARCHITECTURAL PILLARS DEVISED FROM THE LOTUS

The earliest capital seems to have been the bell or
seed vessel, simply copied without alteration, except a
little expansion at the bottom to give it stability. The
leaves of some other plant were then added to it, and
varied in different capitals according to the different
meanings intended to be signified by the accessory symbols.
The Greeks decorated it in the same manner, with the
foliage of various plants, sometimes of the acanthus and
sometimes of the aquatic kind, which are, however,
generally so transformed by excessive attention to elegance,
that it is difficult to distinguish them. The most usual
seems to be the Egyptian acacia, which was probably
adopted as a mystic symbol for the same reasons as the
olive, it being equally remarkable for its powers of
reproduction. Theophrastus mentions a large wood of
it in the “Thebaid,” where the olive will not grow, so
that we reasonably suppose it to have been employed by
the Egyptians in the same symbolical sense. From
them the Greeks seem to have borrowed it about the
time of the Macedonian conquest, it not occurring in any
of their buildings of a much earlier date; and as for the
story of the Corinthian architect, who is said to have
invented this kind of capital from observing a thorn
growing round a basket, it deserved no credit, being fully
contradicted by the buildings still remaining in Upper
Egypt.

The Doric column, which appears to have been the
only one known to the very ancient Greeks, was equally
derived from the Nelumbo; its capital being the same
seed-vessel pressed flat, as it appears when withered and
// 52.png
.bn 52.png
.pn +1
dry—the only state probably in which it had been seen in
Europe. The flutes in the shaft were made to hold
spears and staves, whence a spear-holder is spoken of in
the “Odyssey” as part of a column. The triglyphs and
blocks of the cornice were also derived from utility,
they having been intended to represent the projecting
ends of the beams and rafters which formed the roof.

The Ionic capital has no bell, but volutes formed in
imitation of sea-shells, which have the same symbolical
meaning. To them is frequently added the ornament which
architects call a honeysuckle, but which seems to be
meant for the young petals of the same flower viewed
horizontally, before they are opened or expanded. Another
ornament is also introduced in this capital, which they
call eggs and anchors, but which is, in fact, composed of
eggs and spear-heads, the symbols of female generation
and male destructive power, or in the language of
mythology, of Venus and Mars.—<i>Payne Knight.</i>

.h2
BELLS IN RELIGIOUS WORSHIP

Stripped, however, of all this splendour and magnificence
it was probably nothing more than a symbolical
instrument, signifying originally the motion of the
elements, like the sistrum of Isis, the cymbals of Cybele,
the bells of Bacchus, etc., whence Jupiter is said to have
overcome the Titans with his ægis, as Isis drove away
Typhon with her sistrum, and the ringing of the bells
and clatter of metals were almost universally employed
as a means of consecration, and a charm against the
// 53.png
.bn 53.png
.pn +1
destroying and inert powers. Even the Jews welcomed
the new moon with such noises, which the simplicity of
the early ages employed almost everywhere to relieve
her during eclipses, supposed then to be morbid affections
brought on by the influence of an adverse power. The
title <i>Priapus</i>, by which the generative attribute is distinguished,
seems to be merely a corruption of <i>Briapuos</i>
(clamorous); the <i>beta</i> and <i>pi</i> being commutable letters,
and epithets of similar meaning, being continually applied
both to Jupiter and Bacchus by the poets. Many
Priapic figures, too, still extant, have bells attached to
them, as the symbolical statues and temples of the Hindus
are; and to wear them was a part of the worship of
Bacchus among the Greeks: whence we sometimes find
them of extremely small size, evidently meant to be worn
as amulets with the phalli, lunulæ, etc. The chief priests
of the Egyptians and also the high priests of the Jews,
hung them as sacred emblems to their sacerdotal garments;
and the Brahmins still continue to ring a small bell at the
interval of their prayers, ablutions, and other acts of
devotion; which custom is still preserved in the Roman
Catholic Church at the elevation of the host. The
Lacedæmonians beat upon a brass vessel or pan, on the
death of their kings, and we still retain the custom of
tolling a bell on such occasions, though the reason of it
is not generally known, any more than that of other
remnants of ancient ceremonies still existing.[1] It will
be observed that the bells used by the Christians very
probably came direct from the Buddhists. And from the
same source are derived the beads and rosaries of the
Roman Catholics, which have been used by the Buddhist
// 54.png
.bn 54.png
.pn +1
monks for over 2,000 years. Tinkling bells were
suspended before the shrine of Jupiter Ammon, and
during the service the gods were invited to descend upon
the altars by the ringing of bells; they were likewise
sacred to Siva. Bells were used at the worship of Bacchus,
and were worn on the garments of the Bacchantes, much
in the same manner as they are used at our carnivals and
masquerades.

[Footnote 1: The above description is from Payne Knight’s “Symbolical
Language of ancient Art and Mythology.”]

.h2
HINDU PHALLICISM

The following curious fable is given by Sir William
Jones, as one of the stories of the Hindus for the origin of
Phallic devotion:—“Certain devotees in a remote time had
acquired great renown and respect, but the purity of the
art was wanting, nor did their motives and secret thoughts
correspond with their professions and exterior conduct.
They affected poverty, but were attached to the things of
this world, and the princes and nobles were constantly
sending their offerings. They seemed to sequester themselves
from this world; they lived retired from the towns;
but their dwellings were commodious, and their women
numerous and handsome. But nothing can be hid from
their gods, and Sheevah resolved to put them to shame.
He desired Prakeety (nature) to accompany him; and
assumed the appearance of a Pandaram of a graceful
form. Prakeety was herself a damsel of matchless worth.
She went before the devotees who were assembled with
their disciples, awaiting the rising of the sun, to perform
their ablutions and religious ceremonies. As she advanced
// 55.png
.bn 55.png
.pn +1
the refreshing breeze moved her flowing robe, showed
the exquisite shape which it seemed intended to conceal.
With eyes cast down, though sometimes opening with a
timid but tender look, she approached them, and with a
low enchanting voice desired to be admitted to the sacrifice.
The devotees gazed on her with astonishment. The
sun appeared, but the purifications were forgotten;
the things of the Poojah (worship) lay neglected; nor
was any worship thought of but that of her. Quitting the
gravity of their manners, they gathered round her as
flies round the lamp at night—attracted by its splendour,
but consumed by its flame. They asked from whence
she came; whither she was going. ‘Be not offended
with us for approaching thee, forgive us our importunities.
But thou art incapable of anger, thou who art made to
convey bliss; to thee, who mayest kill by indifference,
indignation and resentment are unknown. But whoever
thou mayest be, whatever motive or accident might have
brought thee amongst us, admit us into the number of
thy slaves; let us at least have the comfort to behold
thee.’ Here the words faltered on the lip, and the soul
seemed ready to take its flight; the vow was forgotten,
and the policy of years destroyed.

“Whilst the devotees were lost in their passions, and
absent from their homes, Sheevah entered their village
with a musical instrument in his hand, playing and singing
like some of those who solicit charity. At the sound of his
voice, the women immediately quitted their occupation;
they ran to see from whom it came. He was as beautiful
as Krishen on the plains of Matra. Some dropped their
jewels without turning to look for them; others let
fall their garments without perceiving that they discovered
those abodes of pleasure which jealousy as well as decency
// 56.png
.bn 56.png
.pn +1
had ordered to be concealed. All pressed forward with
their offerings, all wished to speak, all wished to be taken
notice of, and bringing flowers and scattering them before
him, said—‘Askest thou alms! thou who are made to
govern hearts. Thou whose countenance is as fresh as
the morning, whose voice is the voice of pleasure, and
they breath like that of Vassant (Spring) in the opening of
the rose! Stay with us and we will serve thee; nor
will we trouble thy repose, but only be zealous how to
please thee.’ The Pandaram continued to play, and sung
the loves of Kama (God of Love), of Krishen and the
Gopia, and smiling the gentle smiles of fond desire....

“But the desire of repose succeeds the waste of pleasure.
Sleep closed the eyes and lulled the senses. In the
morning the Pandaram was gone. When they awoke
they looked round with astonishment, and again cast
their eyes on the ground. Some directed to those who
had formerly been remarked for their scrupulous manners,
but their faces were covered with their veils. After
sitting awhile in silence they arose and went back to their
houses, with slow and troubled steps. The devotees
returned about the same time from their wanderings after
Prakeety. The days that followed were days of embarrassment
and shame. If the women had failed in their
modesty, the devotees had broken their vows. They
were vexed at their weakness, they were sorry for what
they had done; yet the tender sigh sometimes broke
forth, and the eyes often turned to where the men first
saw the maid—the women, the Pandaram.

“But the women began to perceive that what the
devotees foretold came not to pass. Their disciples,
in consequence, neglected to attend them, and the offerings
from the princes and nobles became less frequent than
// 57.png
.bn 57.png
.pn +1
before. They then performed various penances; they
sought for secret places among the woods unfrequented
by man; and having at last shut their eyes from the
things of this world, retired within themselves in deep
meditation, that Sheevah was the author of their
misfortunes. Their understanding being imperfect,
instead of bowing the head with humility, they were
inflamed with anger; instead of contrition for their
hypocrisy, they sought for vengeance. They performed
new sacrifices and incantations, which were only allowed
to have effect in the end, to show the extreme folly of
man in not submitting to the will of heaven.

“Their incantations produced a tiger, whose mouth
was like a cavern and his voice like thunder among the
mountains. They sent him against Sheevah, who with
Prakeety was amusing himself in the vale. He smiled
at their weakness, and killing the tiger at one blow with
his club, he covered himself with his skin. Seeing themselves
frustrated in this attempt, the devotees had recourse
to another, and sent serpents against him of the most
deadly kind; but on approaching him they became
harmless, and he twisted them round his neck. They
then sent their curses and imprecations against him, but
they all recoiled upon themselves. Not yet disheartened
by all these disappointments, they collected all their
prayers, their penances, their charities, and other good
works, the most acceptable sacrifices; and demanding
in return only vengeance against Sheevah, they sent a
fire to destroy his genital parts. Sheevah, incensed at
this attempt, turned the fire with indignation against the
human race; and mankind would soon have been
destroyed, had not Vishnu, alarmed at the danger,
implored him to suspend his wrath. At his entreaties
// 58.png
.bn 58.png
.pn +1
Sheevah relented; but it was ordained that in his temples
those parts should be <i>worshipped</i>, which the false doctrines
had impiously attempted to destroy.”

.h2
THE CROSS AND ROSARY

The key which is still worn with the Priapic hand, as an
amulet, by the women of Italy appears to have been an
emblem of the equivocal use of the name, as the language
of that country implies. Of the same kind, too, appears to
have been the cross in the form of the letter <i>tau</i>, attached
to a circle, which many of the figures of Egyptian deities,
both male and female, carry in their left hand; and by the
Syrians, Phœnicians and other inhabitants of Asia,
representing the planet Venus, worshipped by them as the
emblem or image of that goddess. The cross in this
form is sometimes observable on coins, and several of
them were found in a temple of Serapis, demolished at the
general destruction of those edifices by the Emperor
Theodosius, and were said by the Christian antiquaries
of that time to signify the future life. In solemn sacrifices,
all the Lapland idols were marked with it from the blood
of the victims; and it occurs on many Runic ornaments
found in Sweden and Denmark, which are of an age
long anterior to the approach of Christianity to those
countries, and probably to its appearance in the world.
On some of the early coins of the Phœnicians, we find it
attached to a chaplet of beads placed in a circle, so as to
form a complete rosary, such as the Lamas of Thibet
and China, the Hindus, and the Roman Catholics now
tell over while they pray.
// 59.png
.bn 59.png
.pn +1

.h2
BEADS

Beads were anciently used to reckon time, and a circle,
being a line without termination, was the natural emblem
of its perpetual continuity; whence we often find circles
of beads upon the heads of deities, and enclosing the
sacred symbols upon coins and other monuments.
Perforated beads are also frequently found in tombs, both
in the northern and southern parts of Europe and Asia,
whence are fragments of the chaplets of consecration
buried with the deceased. The simple diadem, or fillet,
worn round the head as a mark of sovereignty, had a
similar meaning, and was originally confined to the statues
of deities and deified personages, as we find it upon the
most ancient coins. Chryses, the priest of Apollo, in
the “Iliad,” brings the diadem, or sacred fillet, of the
god upon his sceptre, as the most imposing and invocable
emblem of sanctity; but no mention is made of its being
worn by kings in either of the Homeric poems, nor of any
other ensign of temporal power and command, except the
royal staff or sceptre.

.h2
THE LOTUS

The double sex typified by the Argha and its contents is
by the Hindus represented by the “Mymphœa” or
Lotus, floating like a boat on the boundless ocean, where
the whole plant signifies both the earth and the two
principles of its fecundation. The germ is both Meru and
the Linga; the petals and filaments are the mountains
// 60.png
.bn 60.png
.pn +1
which encircle Meru, and are also a type of the Yoni;
the leaves of the calyx are the four vast regions to the
cardinal points of Meru; and the leaves of the plant are
the Dwipas or isles round the land of Jambu. As this
plant or lily was probably the most celebrated of all the
vegetable creation among the mystics of the ancient world,
and is to be found in thousands of the most beautiful and
sacred paintings of the Christians of this day—I detain
my reader with a few observations respecting it. This is
the more necessary as it appears that the priests have now
lost the meaning of it; at least this is the case with everyone
of whom I have made enquiry; but it is like many other
very odd things, probably understood in the Vatican,
or the crypt of St. Peter’s. Maurice says that among the
different plants which ornament our globe, there is not
one which has received so much honour from man as
the Lotus or Lily, in whose consecrated bosom Brahma
was born, and Osiris delighted to float. This is the
sublime, the hallowed symbol that eternally occurs in
oriental mythology, and in truth not without reason, for it
is itself a lovely prodigy. Throughout all the northern
hemispheres it was everywhere held in profound
veneration, and from Savary we learn that the veneration
is yet continued among the modern Egyptians. And
we find that it still continues to receive the respect if
not the adoration of a great part of the Christian world,
unconscious, perhaps, of the original reason of this
conduct. <i>Higgins’s Anacalypsis.</i>

The following is an account given of it by Payne
Knight, in his curious dissertation on Phallic Worship:—“The
Lotus is the Nelumbo of Linnæus. This plant
grows in the water, among its broad leaves puts forth
a flower, in the centre of which is formed the seed vessel,
// 61.png
.bn 61.png
.pn +1
shaped like a bell or inverted cone, and perforated on the
top with little cavities or cells, in which the seeds grow.
The orifices of these cells being too small to let the seeds
drop out when ripe, they shoot forth into new plants in
the places where they are formed: the bulb of the vessel
serving as a matrix to nourish them, until they acquire
such a degree of magnitude as to burst it open and release
themselves, after which, like other aquatic weeds, they
take root wherever the current deposits them. This
plant, therefore, being thus productive of itself, and
vegetating from its own matrix, without being fostered
in the earth, was naturally adopted as the symbol of the
productive power of the waters, upon which the active
spirit of the Creator operated in giving life and vegetation,
to matter. We accordingly find it employed in every
part of the northern hemisphere, where the symbolical
religion, <i>improperly called idolatry</i>, does or ever did prevail.
The sacred images of the Tartars, Japanese, and Indians
are almost placed upon it, of which numerous instances
occur in the publications of Kœmpfer, Sonnerat, etc.
The Brahma of India is represented as sitting upon his
Lotus throne, and the figure upon the Isaaic table holds the
stem of this plant surmounted by the seed vessel in one
hand, and the Cross representing the male organs of
generation in the other; thus signifying the universal
power, both active and passive, attributed to that goddess.”

Nimrod says:—“The Lotus is a well-known allegory,
of which the expansive calyx represents the ship of the
gods floating on the surface of the water; and the erect
flower arising out of it, the mast thereof. The one was
the galley or cockboat, and the other the mast of cockayne;
but as the ship was Isis or Magna Mater, the female
principle, and the mast in it the male deity, these parts of
// 62.png
.bn 62.png
.pn +1
the flower came to have certain other significations, which
seem to have been as well known at Samosata as at Benares.
This plant was also used in the sacred offices of the Jewish
religion. In the ornaments of the temple of Solomon,
the Lotus or lily is often seen.”

The figure of Isis is frequently represented holding the
stem of the plant in one hand, and the cross and circle
in the other. Columns and capitals resembling the
plant are still existing among the ruins of Thebes, in
Egypt, and the island of Philœ. The Chinese goddess,
Pussa, is represented sitting upon the Lotus, called in
that country Lin, with many arms, having symbols
signifying the various operations of nature, while similar
attributes are expressed in the Scandinavian goddess
Isa or Disa.

The Lotus is also a prominent symbol in Hindu and
Egyptian cosmogony. This plant appears to have the
same tendency with the Sphinx, of marking the connection
between that which produces and that which is produced.
The Egyptian Ceres (Virgo) bears in her hand the blue
Lotus, which plant is acknowledged to be the emblem of
celestial love so frequently seen mounted on the back of
Leo in the ancient remains. The following is a translation
of the Purana relating to the cosmogony of the Hindus,
and will be found interesting as showing the importance
attached to the Lotus in the worship of the ancients:—“We
find Brahma emerging from the Lotus. The whole
universe was dark and covered with water. On this
primeval water did Bhagavat (God), in a masculine
form, repose for the space of one Calpho (a thousand
years); after which period the intention of creating
other beings for his own wise purposes became predominant
in the mind of the <i>Great Creator</i>. In the first
// 63.png
.bn 63.png
.pn +1
place, by his sovereign will was produced the flower
of the Lotus, afterwards, by the same will, was brought
to light the form of Brahma from the said flower; Brahma,
emerging from the cup of the Lotus, looked round on all
the four sides, and beheld from the eyes of his four heads
an immeasurable expanse of water. Observing the whole
world thus involved in darkness and submerged in water,
he was stricken with prodigious amazement, and began
to consider with himself, ‘Who is it that produced me?’
‘whence came I?’ ‘and where am I?’

“Brahma, thus kept two hundred years in contemplation,
prayers, and devotions, and having pondered in
his mind that without connection of male and female an
abundant generation could not be effected—again entered
into profound meditation on the power of the Supreme,
when, on a sudden by the omnipotence of God, was
produced from his right side <i>Swayambhuvah Menu</i>, a man
of perfect beauty; and from the Brahma’s left side a
woman named <i>Satarupa</i>. The prayer of Brahma runs
thus:—‘O Bhagavat! since thou broughtest me from
nonentity into existence for a particular purpose,
accomplish by thy benevolence that purpose.’ In a
short time a small white boar appeared, which soon
grew to the size of an elephant. He now felt God in all,
and that all is from Him, and all in Him. At length the
power of the Omnipotent had assumed the body of <i>Vara</i>.
He began to use the instinct of that animal. Having
divided the water, he saw the earth a mighty barren
stratum. He then took up the mighty ponderous globe
(freed from the water) and spread the earth like a carpet
on the face of the water; Brahma, contemplating the
whole earth, performed due reverence, and rejoicing
exceedingly, began to consider the means of peopling
// 64.png
.bn 64.png
.pn +1
the renovated world.” <i>Pyag</i>, now Allahabad, was the
first land said to have appeared, but with the Brahmins
it is a disputed point, for many affirm that <i>Casi</i> or Benares
was the sacred ground.

.h2
MERU

The learned Higgins, an English judge, who for some
years spent ten hours a day in antiquarian studies, says
that Moriah, of Isaiah and Abraham, is the Meru of the
Hindus, and the Olympus of the Greeks. Solomon
built high places for Ashtoreth, Astarte, or Venus, which
because mounts of Venus, <i>mons veneris</i>—Meru and Mount
Calvary—each a slightly skull-shaped mount, that might
be represented by a bare head. The Bible translators
perpetuate the same idea in the word “calvaria.” Prof.
Stanley denies that “Mount Calvary” took its name
from its being the place of the crucifixion of Jesus.
Looking elsewhere and in earlier times for the bare calvaria,
we find among Oriental women, the Mount of Venus,
<i>mons veneris</i>, through motives of neatness or religious
sentiment, deprived of all hirsute appendage. We see
Mount Calvary imitated in the shaved poll of the head of
a priest. The priests of China, says Mr. J. M. Peebles,
continue to shave the head. To make a place holy,
among the Hindus, Tartars, and people of Thibet, it
was necessary to have a mount Meru, also a Linga-Yoni,
or Arba.
// 65.png
.bn 65.png
.pn +1

.h2
LINGAM IN THE TEMPLE OF ELORA

This marvellous work of excavation by the slow process
of the chisel, was visited by Capt. Seeley, who afterwards
published a volume describing the temple and its vast
statues. The beauty of its architectural ornaments, the
innumerable statues or emblems, all hewn out of solid
rock, dispute with the Pyramids for the first place among
the works undertaken to display power and embody
feeling. The stupendous temple is detached from the
neighbouring mountain by a spacious area all round, and
is nearly 250 feet deep and 150 feet broad, reaching to the
height of 100 feet and in length about 145 feet. It has
well-formed doorways, windows, staircases, upper floors,
containing fine large rooms of a smooth and polished
surface, regularly divided by rows of pillars; the whole
bulk of this immense block of isolated excavation being
upwards of 500 feet in circumference, and having beyond
its areas three handsome figure galleries or verandas
supported by regular pillars. Outside the temple are
two large obelisks or phalli standing, “of quadrangular
form, eleven feet square, prettily and variously carved, and
are estimated at forty-one feet high; the shaft above the
pedestal is seven feet two inches, being larger at the base
than Cleopatra’s Needle.”

In one of the smaller temples was an image of Lingam,
“covered with oil and red ochre, and flowers were daily
strewed on its circular top. This Lingam is larger than
usual, occupying with the altar, a great part of the room.
In most Ling rooms a sufficient space is left for the votaries
to walk round whilst making the usual invocations to the
deity (Maha Deo). This deity is much frequented by
female votaries, who take especial care to keep it clean[**P3: ,]
// 66.png
.bn 66.png
.pn +1
washed, and often perfume it with oderiferous oils and
flowers, whilst the attendant Brahmins sweep the apartment
and attend the five oil lights and bell ringing.” This oil
vessel resembled the Yoni (circular frame), into which the
light itself was placed. No symbol was more venerated
or more frequently met with than the altar and Ling, Siva,
or Maha Deo. “Barren women constantly resort to it to
supplicate for children,” says Seeley. The mysteries
attended upon them is not described, but doubtless they
were of a very similar character to those described by the
author of the “Worship of the Generative Powers of
the Western Nations,” showing again the similarity of
the custom with those practised by the Catholics in France.
The writer says:—“Women sought a remedy for barrenness
by kissing the end of the Phallus; sometimes they
appear to have placed a part of their body, naked, against
the image of the saint, or to have sat upon it. This latter
trait was perhaps too bold an adoption of the indecencies
of Pagan worship to last long, or to be practised openly;
but it appears to have been innocently represented by
lying upon the body of the saint, or sitting upon a stone,
understood to represent him without the presence of the
energetic member. In a corner in the church of the
village of St. Fiacre, near Monceaux, in France, there is a
stone called the chair of St. Fiacre, which confers fecundity
upon women who sit upon it; but it is necessary nothing
should intervene between their bare skin and the stone.
In the church of Orcival in Auvergne, there was a pillar
which barren women kissed for the same purpose and
which had perhaps replaced some less equivocal object.”

The principal object of worship at Elora is the stone, so
frequently spoken of; “the Lingam,” says Seeley, and he
apologises for using the word so often, but asks to be
// 67.png
.bn 67.png
.pn +1
excused, “is an emblem not generally known, but as
frequently met with as the Cross in Catholic worship.”
It is the god Siva, a symbol of his generative character,
the base of which is usually inserted in the Yoni. The
stone is of a conical shape, often black stone, covered
with flowers (the <i>Belia</i> and <i>Asuca</i> shrubs). The flowers
hang pendant from the crown of the Ling stone to the
spout of the <i>Argha or[**remove markup?] Yoni</i> (mystical matrix); the same
as the Phallus of the Greeks. Five lamps are commonly
used in the worship at the symbol, or one lamp with five
wicks. The Lotus is often seen on the top of the Ling.

.h2
VENUS-URANIA.—THE MOTHER GODDESS

The characteristic attribute of the passive generative
power was expressed in symbolical writing, by different
enigmatical representations of the most distinguished
characteristic of the female sex: such as the shell or
<i>Concha Veneris</i>, the fig-leaf, barley corn, and the letter
Delta, all of which occur very frequently upon coins and
other ancient monuments in this sense. The same
attribute personified as the goddess of Love, or desire,
is usually represented under the voluptuous form of a
beautiful woman, frequently distinguished by one of these
symbols, and called Venus, Kypris, or Aphrodite, names
of rather uncertain mythology. She is said to be the
daughter of Jupiter and Dione, that is of the male and
female personifications of the all-pervading Spirit of the
Universe; Dione being the female Dis or Zeus, and therefore
associated with him in the most ancient oracular[**I believe this is supposed to be “oracular”, but unsure]
// 68.png
.bn 68.png
.pn +1
temple of Greece at Dodona. No other genealogy appears
to have been known in the Homeric times; though a
different one is employed to account for the name of
Aphrodite in the “Theogony” attributed to Hesiod.

The <i>Genelullides</i> or <i>Genoidai</i> were the original and
appropriate ministers or companions of Venus, who was
however, afterwards attended by the Graces, the proper
and original attendants of Juno; but as both these
goddesses were occasionally united and represented in
one image, the personifications of their respective subordinate
attributes were on other occasions added:
whence the symbolical statue of Venus at Paphos had a
beard, and other appearances of virility, which seems to
have been the most ancient mode of representing the
celestial as distinguished from the popular goddess of that
name—the one being a personification of a general
procreative power, and the other only of animal desire or
concupiscence. The refinement of Grecian art, however,
when advanced to maturity, contrived more elegant
modes of distinguishing them; and, in a celebrated work
of Phidias, we find the former represented with her foot
upon a tortoise; and in a no less celebrated one of Scopas,
the latter sitting upon a goat. The tortoise, being an
androgynous animal, was aptly chosen as a symbol of
the double power; and the goat was equally appropriate
to what was meant to be expressed in the other.

The same attribute was on other occasions signified by a
dove or pigeon, by the sparrow, and perhaps by the
polypus, which often appears upon coins with the head
of the goddess, and which was accounted an aphrodisiac,
though it is likewise of the androgynous class. The fig
was a still more common symbol, the statue of Priapus
being made of the tree, and the fruit being carried with the
// 69.png
.bn 69.png
.pn +1
Phallus in the ancient processions in honour of Bacchus,
and still continuing among the common people of Italy
to be an emblem of what it anciently meant: whence
we often see portraits of persons of that country painted
with it in one hand, to signify their orthodox elevation to
the fair sex. Hence, also arose the Italian expression <i>far la
fica</i>, which was done by putting the thumb between the
middle and fore-fingers, as it appears in many Priapic ornaments
extant; or by putting the finger or thumb into the
corner of the mouth and drawing it down, of which there
is a representation in a small Priapic figure of exquisite
sculpture, engraved among the <i>Antiquities of Herculaneum</i>.

.h2
LIBERALITY AND SAMENESS OF THE WORLD-RELIGIONS

The same liberal and humane spirit still prevails among
those nations whose religion is founded on the same
principles. “The Siamese,” says a traveller of the
seventeenth century, “shun disputes and believe that
almost all religions are good” (“Journal du Voyage de
Siam”). When the ambassador of Louis XIV asked their
king, in his master’s name, to embrace Christianity, he
replied, “that it was strange that the king of France
should interest himself so much in an affair which concerns
only God, whilst He, whom it did concern, seemed to
leave it wholly to our discretion. Had it been agreeable
to the Creator that all nations should have had the same
form of worship, would it not have been as easy to His
omnipotence to have created all men with the same sentiments
// 70.png
.bn 70.png
.pn +1
and dispositions, and to have inspired them with the
same notions of the True Religion, as to endow them with
such different tempers and inclinations? Ought they
not rather to believe that the true God has as much pleasure
in being honoured by a variety of forms and ceremonies,
as in being praised and glorified by a number of different
creatures? Or why should that beauty and variety,
so admirable in the natural order of things, be less
admirable or less worthy of the wisdom of God in the
supernatural?”

The Hindus profess exactly the same opinion. “They
would readily admit the truth of the Gospel,” says a very
learned writer long resident among them, “but they
contend that it is perfectly consistent with their Shastras.
The Deity, they say, has appeared innumerable times in
many parts of this world and in all worlds, for the salvation
of his creatures; and we adore, they say, the same God, to
whom our several worships, though different in form, are
equally acceptable if they be sincere in substance.”

The Chinese sacrifice to the spirits of the air[** ,] the
mountains and the rivers; while the Emperor himself
sacrifices to the sovereign Lord of Heaven, to whom all
these spirits are subordinate, and from whom they are
derived. The sectaries of Fohi have, indeed, surcharged
this primitive elementary worship with some of the
allegorical fables of their neighbours; but still as their
creed—like that of the Greeks and Romans—remains
undefined, it admits of no dogmatical theology, and of
course no persecution for opinion. Obscure and
sanguinary rites have, indeed, been wisely prescribed on
many occasions; but still <i>as actions and not as opinions</i>.
Atheism is said to have been punished with death at
Athens; but nevertheless it may be reasonably doubted
// 71.png
.bn 71.png
.pn +1
whether the atheism, against which the citizens of that
republic expressed such fury, consisted in a denial of the
existence of the gods; for Diagoras, who was obliged
to fly for this crime, was accused of revealing and calumniating
the doctrines taught in the Mysteries; and from
the opinions ascribed to Socrates, there is reason to believe
that his offence was of the same kind, though he had not
been initiated.

These were the only two martyrs to religion among the
ancient Greeks, such as were punished for actively violating
or insulting the Mysteries, the only part of their worship
which seems to have possessed any vitality; for as to
the popular deities, they were publicly ridiculed and
censured with impunity by those who dared not utter a
word against the populace that worshipped them; and
as to the forms and ceremonies of devotion, they were
held to be no otherwise important, then as they were
constituted a part of civil government of the state; the
Phythian[** Pythian?] priestess having pronounced from the tripod,
that <i>whoever performed the rites of his religion according to the
laws of his country, performed them in a manner pleasing to the
Deity</i>. Hence the Romans made no alterations in the
religious institutions of any of the conquered countries;
but allowed the inhabitants to be as absurd and extravagant
as they pleased, and to enforce their absurdities and
extravagances wherever they had any pre-existing laws
in their favour. An Egyptian magistrate would put
one of his fellow-subjects to death for killing a cat or a
monkey; and though the religious fanaticism of the
Jews was too sanguinary and too violent to be left entirely
free from restraint, a chief of the synagogue could order
anyone of his congregation to be whipped for neglecting
or violating any part of the Mosaic Ritual.
// 72.png
.bn 72.png
.pn +1

The principle underlying the system of emanations
was, that all things were of one substance, from which they
were fashioned and into which they were again dissolved,
by the operation of one plastic spirit universally diffused
and expanded. The polytheist of ancient Greece and
Rome candidly thought, like the modern Hindu, that all
rites of worship and forms of devotion were directed
to the same end, though in different modes and through
different channels. “<i>Even they who worship other gods</i>,” says
Krishna, the incarnate Deity, in an ancient Indian poem
(<i>Bhagavat-Gita</i>), “<i>worship me although they know it not</i>.”—<i>Payne
Knight.</i>

.ce
<s>THE END.</s>
